Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1980, Vol. 39, No. 5, 752-766 Heuristic Versus Systematic Information Processing and the Use of Source Versus Message Cues in Persuasion Shelly Chaiken University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada In Experiment 1, subjects read a persuasive message from a likable or unlikable communicator who presented six or two arguments concerning one of two topics. High response involvement subjects anticipated discussing the message topic at a future experimental session, whereas low involvement subjects anticipated dis- cussing a different topic. For high involvement subjects, opinion change was significantly greater given six arguments but was unaffected by communicator likability. For low involvement subjects, opinion change was significantly greater given a likable communicator but was unaffected by the arguments manipulation. In Experiment 2, high issue involvement subjects showed slightly greater opinion change when exposed to five arguments from an unlikable (vs. one argument from a likable) communicator, whereas low involvement subjects exhibited sig- nificantly greater persuasion in response to one argument from a likable (vs. five arguments from an unlikable) communicator. These findings support the idea that high involvement leads message recipients to employ a systematic informa- tion processing strategy in which message-based cognitions mediate persuasion, whereas low involvement leads recipients to use a heuristic processing strategy in which simple decision rules mediate persuasion. Support was also obtained for the hypothesis that content-mediated (vs. source-mediated) opinion change would shower greater persistence. This research distinguishes between a sys- According to a systematic view, recipients tematic and a heuristic view of persuasion, exert considerable cognitive effort in perform- Both conceptualizations regard message re- ing this task: They actively attempt to com- cipients as concerned with assessing the prehend and evaluate the message's arguments validity of the message's overall conclusion, as well as to assess their validity in relation to the message's conclusion. In contrast, ac- cording to a heuristic view of persuasion, re- This article is based on a dissertation submitted cipients exert comparatively little effort in in partial fulfillment of the doctoral requirements judging message validity: Rather than pro- at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst. The cessing argumentation, recipients may rely author is grateful to Alice H. Eagly and Icek Ajzen ible information Qn (typlcally) more access for their counsel and to John W. Fee III and John , ,, , ., ... ., Keenan, who served as experimenters in Experiment such as the source s identity or other non- i. John Bassili, Alice H. Eagly, Johnathan L. Freed- content cues in deciding to accept a message's man, Melvin Manis, and Wendy Wood provided conclusion. In essence, a systematic view of helpful comments on earlier drafts of this manu- persuasion emphasizes detailed processing of script. A report on Experiment 1 was presented at CQ d fa } { the meeting of the American Psychological Associ- , ,b . . , ,. . , . , 6 ation, Toronto, Canada, August 1978. Experiment 2 based cognitions in mediating opinion change, was partially funded by a grant from the Humanities whereas a heuristic view de-emphasizes de- and Social Sciences Committee of the Research tailed information processing and focuses on Board of the University of Toronto. heuristics the role of simple rules Qr cognitive Requests for reprints should be sent to Shelly persuasion. jn mediati Chaiken, Department of Psychology, Ermdale Col- ° * lege, University of Toronto, Mississauga, Ontario, Stimulated largely by traditional theoriz- Canada LSL 1C6. ing (e.g., Hovland, Janis, & Kelley, 1953; Copyright 1980 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0022-3514/80/3905-0752J00.75 7S2

SOURCE VERSUS MESSAGE CUES 753 McGuire, 1968, 1969), much persuasion re- the basis of whether the communicator search has assumed that source, message, and seemed credible. Such a conclusion calls to audience variables affect opinion change to mind McGuire's (1969) "lazy organism" mes- the extent that they influence either message sage-recipient who utilizes source-linked in- reception (attention, comprehension) or yield- formation as a cue for accepting or rejecting ing to what is received (cf. McGuire, 1968). the message "without really absorbing the To better understand the distinction between arguments used" (p. 198). systematic versus heuristic processing, it is Heuristic information processing may in- useful to differentiate yielding to persuasive volve the use of relatively general rules argumentation from yielding to a message's (scripts, schemata) developed by individuals overall conclusion. In a systematic view, in- through their past experiences and observa- dependent variables (e.g., source factors) tions (cf. Abelson, 1976; Stotland & Canon, indirectly affect yielding to a message's con- 1972). For example, persons may possess and clusion and therefore persuasion via their di- utilize the rule or categorical script (Abel- rect impact on reception or argument-accept- son, 1976) that statements by experts can ance processes. According to a heuristic view, usually be considered veridical, or that state- such variables may directly influence the ments by generally trustworthy persons prob- recipient's willingness to accept the message's ably reflect those persons' honest opinions. conclusion without necessarily influencing re- With respect to source attractiveness, recipi- ception or acceptance of argumentation. ents may agree with attractive communicators Research suggesting that good comprehen- because they employ the rule that "people sion of persuasive argumentation often facili- generally agree with people they like." Such tates opinion change (e.g., Chaiken & Eagly, a script may derive from past experiences 1976; Eagly, 1974; Eagly & Warren, 1976) with others or, alternatively, may stem from and research suggesting that distraction often a lower-order rule suggesting a fairly con- enhances persuasion by interfering with re- sistent association between the concepts of cipients' abilities to critically evaluate per- liking and interpersonal similarity (Stotland suasive argumentation (e.g., Osterhouse & & Canon, 1972). Other heuristics may under- Brock, 1970; Petty, Wells, & Brock, 1976) lie the persuasive impact of other cues. For illustrate a systematic view of persuasion. example, the finding that recipients are less Although little if any research has been ex- persuaded when an overheard audience ex- plicitly guided by a heuristic view of per- presses disapproval (vs. approval) of a mes- suasion, such a conceptualization seems war- sage (Landy, 1972; Silverthorne & Mazma- ranted by research suggesting that recipients nian, 1975) might reflect their use of a con- often agree or disagree with a message pri- sensus heuristic: Recipients may reject such marily on the basis of their reactions to non- a message because most other recipients find content cues such as communicator credibility it unacceptable. (Miller, Maruyama, Beaber, & Valone, 1976), When will recipients employ a systematic perceived audience opinion (e.g., Landy, rather than heuristic processing strategy? A 1972; Silverthorne & Mazmanian, 1975), or heuristic strategy has the economic advantage external feedback about recipients' own in- of requiring a minimum of cognitive effort. ternal states (e.g., Giesen & Hendrick, 1974; Certainly, judging message acceptability on Hendrick & Giesen, 1976; Mintz & Mills, the basis of noncontent cues is less effortful 1971). For example, Miller et al. (1976) than receiving and analyzing persuasive argu- found that faster (communicator) speech mentation. Countering this advantage, a rates enhanced both perceptions of communi- heuristic strategy may be a less reliable means cator credibility and persuasion. Finding no of judging message validity. In the long run, evidence that the persuasive impact of speech overreliance on simple decision rules may in- rate was mediated either by comprehension flate Type 1 and Type 2 errors: Recipients effects or by counterargument disruption, the may sometimes accept (reject) message con- authors concluded that subjects may have clusions they might otherwise have (cor- predicated their opinion judgments simply on rectly) rejected (accepted) had they invested

754 SHELLY CHAIKEN the time and effort to receive and scrutinize der conditions of low, but not high, issue argumentation. A functional perspective sug- involvement (Rhine & Severence, 1970) and gests that recipients will employ a systematic response involvement (Johnson & Scileppi, strategy when reliability concerns outweigh 1969). Also, Petty and Capioppo (1979) economic concerns, and a heuristic strategy recently found that a manipulation of argu- when economic concerns predominate. ment strength had a greater persuasive im- Reliability concerns should be paramount pact when issue involvement was high. The and a systematic strategy therefore employed present research systematically explored the when recipients perceive that it is important utility of the systematic versus heuristic to formulate a highly accurate or veridical analysis of persuasion and its implications re- opinion judgment. Recipients are likely to garding the persuasive impact of source and hold such a perception under conditions of message cues. high "issue involvement" (Kiesler, Collins, & Experiment 1 Miller, 1969) or high "response involvement" Subjects read a persuasive message contain- (Zimbardo, 1960). That is, when recipients ing six or two arguments from a likable or un- receive messages on personally important likable communicator under conditions of topics or when recipients feel that their opin- high or low response involvement ("conse- ion judgments have important consequences quences"). It was expected that high involve- for themselves (e.g., recipients may expect to ment subjects would employ a systematic discuss or defend their opinions, or to engage processing strategy and would therefore show in behavior congruent with their expressed greater opinion change in response to mes- opinions) or for others (e.g., jurors' verdicts). sages containing six arguments but would be When asked for an opinion on an unimpor- unaffected by the likability manipulation. In tant topic or when one's opinion judgment is contrast, it was expected that low involvement perceived as inconsequential, recipients may subjects would employ a heuristic strategy give economic concerns greater weight and and would therefore express greater agree- employ a heuristic processing strategy. ment with the likable communicator but This analysis has implications regarding would be unaffected by the arguments manip- the relative impact of source and message ulation. variables on persuasion. In the systematic The experiment also explored opinion per- view, recipients focus primarily on message sistence. It was assumed that opinion change content. Although source or other noncontent would persist to the extent that it was bol- cues may sometimes be used as aids in assess- stered by topic-relevant cognitions. It was ing the validity of persuasive argumentation, also assumed that recipients who adopted a such cues may be used in only a secondary belief on the basis of who the communicator manner. Thus, when recipients employ a sys- was would possess fewer supportive cogni- tematic processing strategy, message charac- tions than recipients who adopted a belief on teristics (e.g., amount, comprehensibility, the basis of what the communicator said. validity of persuasive argumentation) may These assumptions led to the hypothesis that exert a stronger impact on persuasion than the presumably content-mediated (initial) source characteristics (e.g., credibility, lik- opinion change manifested by high involve- ability). Conversely, in the heuristic view of ment subjects would show greater persistence persuasion, recipients avoid detailed process- than the presumably source-mediated opinion ing of message content and instead rely on change manifested by low involvement sub- information such as the source's identity in jects. To test this hypothesis, subjects' opin- judging message acceptability. Thus, when ions were reassessed approximately 10 days recipients employ a heuristic strategy, source after their laboratory participation. characteristics may exert a greater impact on persuasion than message characteristics. Method Consistent with the above reasoning, pre- Subjects vious researchers have shown that source Subjects were 207 male and female University of credibility significantly affects persuasion un- Massachusetts undergraduates who participated for

SOURCE VERSUS MESSAGE CUES 755 extra course credit in sessions containing up to six various student organizations. After praising or in- subjects. Nine subjects were eliminated because they sulting undergraduates in response to a question suspected an influence attempt (three) or questioned from the interviewer, the communicator was asked the cover story (six). Data from IS others were for his opinion on his "assigned" topic (sleep habits discarded because they were not administered the or trimester system). The remainder of the tran- delayed opinion posttest (13), or because they as- script consisted of the communicator's statement of sociated the posttest with their laboratory partici- his overall position (see below) and his presentation pation (two).1 of various supportive arguments. Procedure Independent Variables At the first (in actuality, the only) session of a Perceived consequences. Response involvement, "two-session experiment on opinions and group dis- or perceived consequences, was manipulated by pre- cussions," the experimenter explained that subjects senting subjects with a message on a topic identical would receive "discussion topics," give their opinions to or different from the topic they were assigned on these topics, and respond to another question- to be interviewed on and discuss at the "second naire. Subjects learned that at "the second session" experimental session." Some subjects assigned to the sleep/trimester topic received a sleep/trimester mes- they would be individually interviewed about their opinions on their assigned topics and then discuss sage (high consequences), whereas others received a their opinions in groups. After this introduction, trimester/sleep message (low consequences). Communicator likability. Likability was manipu- each subject received a list of five topics and, via a sham random drawing, was assigned one of two lated via the communicator's response to the inter- topics (sleep habits or the trimester system) from viewer's question, "How do you like working with this list. undergraduates?" (cf. Eagly & Chaiken, 197S; Justifying the persuasive message, the experi- Jones & Brehm, 1967). This response appears below. menter stated that subjects would read an opinion Phrases specific to the likable or the unlikable ver- interview conducted in a related study to "get an sion are enclosed in parentheses or brackets, respec- idea of what their own interview would be like." tively. The experimenter noted that the related study had used the same topics but had employed university Well, as a matter of fact, I (really enjoy it a lot) administrators and faculty, rather than undergradu- [don't really enjoy it very much]. When I first started my job here at the university I was a ates, as subjects. Subjects then received an inter- little apprehensive about the idea of working so view transcript (persuasive message, see below) to much with undergraduates. Over the years, (how- read. Afterwards, subjects completed a questionnaire ever, I've realized that my apprehension was un- that solicited their opinions on all five topics. justified) [I'm sorry to say, I think that my ap- "As a second experimental focus" subjects next prehension has been justified]. The undergraduates completed a questionnaire assessing their "reactions who I've met both in my work with various to the interview transcripts." This questionnaire student organizations and in other settings as well, contained the remaining dependent measures (see strike me as being pretty (responsible and mature) below). Finally, subjects were excused after being [irresponsible and immature]. They're really (con- told that they would be scheduled for "Session 2" later in the semester. cerned) [unconcerned], I think, with their role in society. I don't know, of course, but sometimes Approximately 10 days later (mean delay = 10.39 I think that the public too often (underestimates) days; range = 8-15 days), subjects were telephoned [overestimates] the ability and maturity of today's by an experimenter who was blind to experimental college student. They (just don't give undergradu- condition. Under the guise of conducting a campus ates enough credit) [give undergraduates more opinion survey, the experimenter solicited subjects' credit than they deserve]. Anyway, (it's no wonder agreement with various opinion statements, two of that) [sometimes I wonder why] I continue to which corresponded to the positions advocated in do the work I do. ... For me, working with the messages presented at the laboratory session. undergraduates (has been pretty) [really hasn't After probing for suspicion regarding the relation- been very] rewarding. ship between the posttest and the laboratory session, the experimenter thanked subjects for cooperating Topic and position advocated. Two topics, sleep in the telephone survey. Subsequently, debriefing habits and the trimester system, were used. The letters were mailed to "all participants. positions advocated in the persuasive messages were "People should sleep much less than 8 hours per Interview Transcripts The transcripts began with an interviewer asking 1 Including these IS subjects in analyses performed an interviewee (communicator) for background in- on initial opinion change and other measures as- formation. The communicator was portrayed as a sessed at the laboratory session yielded findings male university administrator who worked with virtually identical to those reported in the text.

756 SHELLY CHAIKEN night," and "The university should switch from its position, and each supportive argument that the two-semester system to a trimester system." Topics communicator had presented. An argument was and positions were selected after pretesting with an scored correct if in the opinion of two independent additional 50 subjects who indicated their agree- raters (r = .86) it accurately summarized an argu- ment with various opinion statements. The major ment appearing in the message. All subjects recalled selection criterion was that the two statements be the message's topic and all but four (retained in the counterattitudinal and have similar mean ratings on analyses) accurately specified its overall position. the 15-point agreement scale (Ms = 10.72 and 10.54 Other measures. To measure the effort subjects for sleep and trimester topics, respectively, where expended processing message content, the experi- 1 signified strong agreement). Because of the study's menter covertly recorded the time each subject focus on response involvement (consequences) rather spent reading the interview transcript. On the last than issue involvement, an additional criterion re- page of the reactions questionnaire, subjects rated quired the topics to be rated similarly and not ex- the message topic's importance, their desire to be tremely on personal importance. The sleep and tri- well informed on the topic, the effort they had mester topics were considered "neither important nor spent reading the message, the relative amount of unimportant" (Ms — 8.07 and 7.34, respectively, on time they had spent thinking about the communi- a 15-point scale) by pilot subjects (N — 22). cator's arguments (vs. his personal characteristics), Number of arguments. Amount of persuasive and their interest in the communicator's arguments argumentation was varied by preparing messages (all on 15-point scales). Subjects also indicated containing six or two supportive arguments. Two their age, sex, and assigned topics. In the laboratory, renditions of each message type were written. Each subjects wrote down their interpretations of the rendition of the longer message presented the same study; over the telephone, they were asked if they'd six arguments in a different (randomly selected) been in any similar opinion surveys. These responses order. Each rendition of the shorter message con- were coded for suspicion. tained two different arguments drawn randomly from the pool of six. Resets Measuring Instruments The design included two levels each of per- ceived consequences, communicator likability, Opinions. Immediately after message exposure, number of arguments, message topic, subject subjects indicated their agreement with the overall positions stated in the persuasive messages (see sex, and message rendition (nested within above) by marking 15-point scales anchored by levels of topic and number of arguments). agree strongly and disagree strongly. During the Since preliminary analyses yielded few effects delayed telephone posttest, subjects indicated their due to message rendition, all reported analyses agreement with similarly worded opinion state- ignored this variable. Of the few sex and topic ments by responding orally to 5-point scales an- chored by definitely agree and definitely disagree. effects yielded by the reported analyses, only Thoughts. On the questionnaire assessing their those relevant to the major hypotheses are "reactions to the interview transcript," subjects were presented here. first given 3 minutes to list their "thoughts" about the communicator's statements. Thoughts were scored by two independent raters as message-ori- ented or communicator-oriented (M, C) and as 2 Statements that could not be placed into any of positively, negatively, or neutrally valenced (+, the six categories were coded as "other thoughts" —, 0). Examples of statements placed in each cate- and were not analyzed. It should be noted that the gory along with interrater reliability coefficients present thought-scoring procedure parallels to a cer- (Pearson rs) are: M + (r = .86): "The economic tain extent scoring procedures typically used by per- advantages of the trimester agree with me"; M — suasion researchers (e.g., Osterhouse & Brock, 1970). (r =.&&): "Reason for trimester not sound logi- Statements traditionally referred to as counter- cally"; M0(r =.86): "He said REM (sleep) can arguments and source derogations are, in the present be controlled"; C+ (r = .85): "He was very scheme, termed negative message-oriented thoughts polite"; C - (r = .82): "He was a little close- and negative communicator-oriented thoughts, re- minded"; CO (r = .7S): "Hesitant about talking spectively. Statements commonly referred to as sup- about self." ~ portive thoughts are, in the p'resent scheme, termed Source perception. Subjects next rated the com- positive message-oriented or communicator-oriented municator on 15-point bipolar adjective scales. Posi- thoughts depending on whether they refer more to tive poles of the 12 scales used were warm, knowl- the message or more to the communicator. For each cdgable, modest, intelligent, approachable, compe- type of thought, each independent rater judged the tent, likable, trustworthy, pleasing, sincere, friendly, number of such thoughts listed by each subject. and unbiased. Interrater reliability was calculated separately for Message comprehension. Next, subjects were each thought category by determining the correlation asked to write down the message topic, its overall between the two raters' judgments.

SOURCE VERSUS MESSAGE CUES 757 Check on Experimental Conditions Table 1 Initial and Delayed Opinion Change as a The communicator who praised (vs. in- Function of Perceived Future Consequences, sulted) undergraduates was judged more lik- Communicator Likability, and Number of able, Ms = 4.22 versus 8.83, F(l, 151) = Arguments Presented: Experiment 1 125.14, p < .001. Subjects recalled more per- suasive arguments when the message con- Likable Unlikable tained six (vs. two) arguments, Ms = 2.81 communicator communicator versus 1.56, F(l, 151) = 76.18, p< .001. Six Two Six Two Finally, the consequences manipulation suc- Opinion argu- argu- argu- argu- cessfully induced the conditions thought nec- change ments ments ments ments essary to foster systematic versus heuristic in- formation processing: High (vs. low) conse- High perceived consequences quences subjects expressed a greater desire to Initial 2.79 2.20 3.28 .48 be well-informed on the message topic, Ms = Delayed 3.02 2.48 2.15 .94 6.24 versus 7.05, F(l, 151) = 3.69, p < .06. Low perceived consequences It is important to note that assignment to Initial 3.16 1.98 1.41 .95 topics did not lead subjects to "strategically" Delayed 2.53 .70 1.54 .47 shift their opinions (cf., Cialdini, Levy, Her- man, Kozlowski, & Petty, 1976): Topic As- Note. Cell ns range from 20 to 26. signed X Topic Received analyses of variance on subjects' initial and delayed opinions on initial opinion change given the likable (vs. the two topics yielded no significant effects unlikable) communicator, F(l, 151) = 3.92, due to topic assignment (Fs < 1.0). The p < .05, but were unaffected by the amount topic-received main effect was significant on of argumentation provided, F(l, 151) = 1.48, all four opinion measures (ps < .05), indi- ns. Although these results conformed to pre- cating that the persuasive messages success- dictions, the differences between consequences fully shifted subjects' opinions. conditions proved statistically weak on an overall basis. Of the interactions implied by Opinions the major hypothesis, neither the Conse- Mean opinion change scores for the pri- quences X Arguments nor Consequences X mary experimental conditions appear in Table Likability interactions reached significance in 1.3 Analysis on subjects' initial opinion change the full analysis of variance (ps — .24 and .25, scores revealed main effects due to communi- cator likability, F(l, 151) =4.16, p < .05; number of arguments received, F(l, 151) = 3 Initial opinions were measured on IS-point scales and delayed opinions on 5-point scales. For 6.14, p < .05; and message topic, F(l, 151) comparability, subjects' delayed opinion scores were = 4.56, p < .05. Overall, greater initial transformed to 15-point scales (see Minium, 1970, change occurred given the likable (vs. un- p. 115). Opinion change scores were formed by likable) communicator (Ms = 2.54 vs. 1.51), subtracting the mean opinion expressed by an in- ternal control group from each subject's (initial or six (vs. two) persuasive arguments (Ms = delayed) opinion. All subjects receiving a sleep 2.67 vs. 1.47), and trimester (vs. sleep) message formed an internal control group on the messages (Ms = 2.60 vs. 1.59). trimester topic for subjects reading a trimester Planned comparisons on initial opinion message, and all subjects who received a trimester change yielded findings supportive of the message served as internal controls on the sleep topic for subjects reading a sleep message. The study's major hypothesis. As Figure 1 illus- opinions expressed by internal control subjects did trates, high consequences subjects showed not differ significantly from those expressed by an greater initial opinion change in response to external control group of opinion-only pilot subjects: six (vs. two) arguments, F(l, 151) =4.62, For the sleep topic, M = 10.23 versus M = 10.72 for internal and external controls, respectively, p < .05, but were unaffected by communi- t(137)=.80; for the trimester topic, M- 10.32 cator likability, F(l, 151) < 1.0. In contrast, versus M = 10.54 for internal and external controls, low consequences subjects showed greater respectively, ((142) = .34.

758 SHELLY CHAIKEN opinion change declined significantly for low consequences subjects exposed to the likable A 3.0 communicator, Ms = 2.59 versus 1.65, F(l, •3 e 151) = 7.24, p < .01, although not for those exposed to the unlikable communicator, Ms 2.0[ = 1.18 versus 1.00, F < 1.0. The nonsignifi- LU ~"*^^^^ cant decrement in the latter condition prob- CD 1.5 ^~~~— ably reflects the fact that initial change in ~ —o 1.0 this cell was low and only marginally greater T O • • LIKEABLE COMMUNICATOR than zero, *(43) = 1.99, p < .10. .5 -r 0 O UNLIKEABLE COMMUNICATOR Paralleling the initial opinion change find- O o 1 I ings, the repeated measures analysis also 2 yielded between-subjects effects due to lik- Q o . 3.0 B ^^ ability (p < .05), arguments (p < .05), and _1 2.5 ~"~"~--\. a marginal effect due to message topic (p < p .10). In addition, a Consequences X Likability 2.0 X Arguments X Topic interaction (p < .05) 1 5 was obtained. This interaction indicated that the primary experimental variables exerted a 1.0 stronger impact on opinions within trimester • • SIX ARGUMENTS (vs. sleep) message conditions even though .5 O O TWO ARGUMENTS the patterning of opinion change means was n i i generally consistent within both topics. HIGH LOW CONSEQUENCES CONSEQUENCES Comprehension and Thoughts Figure 1. Panel A depicts initial opinion change as a function of communicator likability and perceived In addition to the manipulation check noted consequences; Panel B depicts initial opinion change as a function of number of arguments presented and earlier, the analysis on argument recall yielded perceived consequences. a consequences effect (p < .005) and a Con- sequences X Arguments interaction (p < .05). respectively), and the Consequences X Argu- Overall, high (vs. low) consequences subjects ments X Likability interaction attained only recalled more arguments (Ms = 2.40 vs. marginal significance (p < .10). 1.98), and this difference was most pro- To explore opinion persistence, a repeated nounced given six persuasive arguments. measures analysis of variance employing time Subjects reading trimester (vs. sleep) mes- of posttest (initial vs. delayed) as an addi- sages also recalled more arguments (p < tional design factor was performed. A time of .001). posttest main effect, F(l, 151) =3.96, p< Analyses were performed on each type of .05, revealed an overall trend for opinion thought emitted by subjects (M +, M —, change to dissipate over the 10-day posttest interval (Ms = 2.07 vs. 1.76)." The Time X Consequences X Likability interaction, F(l, ••Subjects' opinions were reassessed between 8 and 151) = 4.00, p < .05, showed a data pattern 15 days after the initial posttest (mean delay = roughly in accord with the hypothesis that 10.39 days). Analysis of variance on days between greater persistence would be shown by high posttest yielded no significant effects. Thus all ex- perimental groups were subjected to approximately consequences subjects. Regardless of com- the same delay interval. Also, unless they were municator likability, the opinion change mani- playing the role of "cooperative" subjects to the fested by high consequences subjects remained hilt, the low rate of suspicion or innocent mention relatively stable between posttests: Ms = of their earlier laboratory experience expressed by 2.48 versus 2.78, F< 1.0, for likable com- subjects during the "telephone opinion survey" sug- gested that the experiment had been successful in municator; Ms = 1.88 versus 1.54, F< 1.0, divorcing the context of the delayed posttest from for unlikable communicator. In contrast, the context of the initial opinion posttest.

SOURCE VERSUS MESSAGE CUES 759 MO, C +, C -, CO) and also on three de- (p < .05), and rated the topic as being more rived indices: Message-oriented minus com- important (p < .001). municator-oriented thoughts (regardless of valence), positive minus negative thoughts Correlational Analyses (regardless of orientation), and total thoughts Correlational analyses provided further in- expressed. For brevity, only the analyses on formation regarding the cognitive mediation the derived indices are reported. Relatively of initial opinion change. Correlations be- more message-oriented than communicator- tween opinion change and perceptions of the oriented thoughts were expressed by high communicator (source ratings, positive and (vs. low) consequences subjects (p = .06), negative communicator-oriented thoughts) and also by subjects exposed to six (vs. two) were generally low and nonsignificant, with arguments (p < .005) and the likable (vs. the exception of perceived expertise, which unlikable) communicator (p < .005). A lik- correlated positively with opinion change ability effect on positive minus negative within both low and high consequences con- thoughts (p < .001) indicated that the likable ditions (r = .29, p < .005, and r = .25, p < communicator elicited more positive than .05, respectively). As anticipated by the sys- negative thoughts, whereas the unlikable com- tematic versus heuristic analysis of persua- municator elicited more negative thoughts. No sion, argument recall and both positive and effects obtained on total thoughts expressed. negative message-oriented thoughts were sig- nificantly correlated with initial opinion Source Perception change within high consequences conditions (recall: r = .26, p < .05; M + : r = .41, p < A factor analysis (varimax rotation) of the .001; M-: r= -.32, p< .001), but only source ratings yielded two rotated factors, negligibly related within low consequences labeled attractiveness (e.g., warm, likable, conditions (recall: r = .06; M+: r = .20, friendly) and expertise (e.g., knowledgable, p < .10; M-: r = -.16, p < .15). intelligent, competent). These factors ac- Multiple regression analyses using initial counted for 55.8% and 10.2% of the vari- • opinion change as the criterion variable were ance, respectively. Factor scores were com- also performed.5 Within high consequences puted for each subject and treated by analy- conditions, greater initial opinion change was sis of variance. The trustworthy, sincere, and predicted primarily by a greater number of unbiased scales, which loaded highly on both positive message-oriented thoughts (p < neither factor, were analyzed separately. .05) and positive communicator-oriented These analyses revealed that the likable (vs. thoughts (p = .07), fewer negative message- unlikable) communicator was viewed as more oriented thoughts (p = .10), and greater ar- attractive, expert, trustworthy, sincere, and gument recall (p = .11). Within low conse- unbiased (ps < .005). quences conditions, variables that signifi- cantly or marginally predicted greater initial Other Dependent Variables opinion change included heightened percep- High (vs. low) consequences subjects spent more time reading the persuasive message 5 Two (regular) multiple regression analyses were (p < .005) and reported spending more time performed, one employing data from high conse- thinking about the communicator's arguments quence subjects (n = 89) and one using data from than his personal characteristics (/><.01). low consequences subjects (n = 94). Both analyses Subjects exposed to six (vs. two) persuasive employed the following predictor variables: age, arguments also took longer to read the mes- time spent reading the message, self-reported time sage (/><.001), spent more time thinking spent thinking about the communicator's argumen- tation (vs. personal characteristics), attractiveness about the communicator's arguments (p < factor scores, expertise factor scores, arguments re- .001), expressed a greater desire to be well called, positive and negative communicator-oriented informed on the topic (p < .005), reported thoughts, and positive and negative message-oriented exerting greater effort reading the message thoughts.

760 SHELLY CHAIKEN tions of communicator expertise (p < .05) University of Toronto (U of T) administrator who had previously held a similar position at the Uni- and a greater number of positive communi- versity of British Columbia (UBC). Similar to the cator-oriented thoughts (p — .06). device employed in Experiment 1, the communi- cator's likability or unlikability was conveyed via Experiment 2 his response to the interviewer's question, "By the way, how do you like U of T compared to UBC?" A conceptual replication of the first experi- In essence, the likable communicator responded by praising U of T students and faculty and extolling ment was conducted in order to extend the the virtues of living in Toronto (at the expense of generality of the systematic versus heuristic UBC and Vancouver), whereas the unlikable com- analysis. This study included only the most municator responded by derogating U of T students theoretically interesting combinations of the and faculty and the city of Toronto (to the benefit of UBC and Vancouver). arguments and likability variables and ma- Personal relevance of message topic. The next nipulated issue involvement ("personal rele- page of the booklet informed subjects that they vance") rather than response involvement. would read a transcript of the "target's speech on In the 2 x2 design of Experiment 2, sub- the issue of switching from a two-semester to a tri- jects read a message consisting of either five mester system at the university." It was stated that the speech had been presented to a university com- persuasive arguments from an unlikable com- mittee charged with studying the issue. High (vs. municator or one persuasive argument from a low) personal relevance was manipulated by stating likable communicator under conditions of that, if the Committee approved a switch, the uni- either high or low personal relevance. It was versity would adopt the trimester system in the predicted that subjects in high personal rele- 1981 (vs. 1985) academic year. Persuasive message. The last page of the book- vance conditions would be more persuaded by let contained the persuasive message, whose overall five arguments from an unlikable communi- position stated that "the University of Toronto cator than by one argument from a likable should switch from its current two-term system to communicator. Conversely, low personal a trimester system." Opinion data from an inde- pendent group of control subjects (N = 125) indi- relevance subjects were expected to show cated that U of T undergraduates disagreed moder- greater opinion change in the one-argument/ ately with this position (M = 10.33 on a 15-point likable-communicator condition than in the scale on which 15 signified extreme disagreement). five-arguments/unlikable-communicator con- In the message, the communicator first stated his dition. Experiment 2 did not examine opinion overall position and, if portrayed earlier as unlik- able, provided five arguments supporting this posi- persistence and did not include the full set of tion. If the communicator had been portrayed as dependent measures employed in Experiment 1. likable, he presented only one supportive argument (drawn randomly from the pool of five arguments). Both messages ended with the communicator re- Method stating his overall position on the message topic. Subjects Dependent measures. After examining their ex- perimental booklets, subjects were given a one-page Subjects were 80 University of Toronto under- questionnaire. Subjects first wrote down the com- graduates enrolled in the author's introductory psy- municator's overall position (all subjects satisfac- chology course who volunteered to remain after torily recalled the position) and then indicated their class one evening to participate in an "impression agreement with this position by marking a 15-point formation" experiment. scale anchored by strongly disagree and strongly agree. Next, subjects rated the communicator on the Procedure following 15-point bipolar adjective scales: warm- cold, likable-unlikable, friendly-unfriendly, and sin- Each subject received one of four versions (repre- cere-insincere. On 15-point scales, subjects next senting the four experimental conditions) of an ex- indicated how personally relevant they considered perimental booklet. The instructions printed on the the message topic to be, the relative amount of time cover page informed subjects that they would record they had spent thinking about the communicator's their impressions of a "target speaker" after first arguments (vs. personal characteristics), and the reading a "partial transcript of an interview with extent to which they typically agreed (disagreed) the target" and a "transcript of a speech made by with people they liked (disliked). Subjects also indi- the target." cated their sex and wrote down their interpretations Communicator likability. The first page of the of the experiment. Three subjects (retained in the booklet presented the "interview transcript." The analyses) were assessed as being suspicious of an target speaker (communicator) was portrayed as a influence attempt (two) or the cover story (one).

SOURCE VERSUS MESSAGE CUES 761 Results Table 2 Mean Opinion Change and Use of the The design included two levels each of sub- Liking/Agreement Rule as a Function of ject sex, personal relevance of message topic, Personal Relevance and Source-Argument and source-argument pairing (unlikable com- Pairing: Experiment 2 municator - five arguments vs. likable com- municator-one argument). Since preliminary Unlikable/ Likable/ Dependent five one analyses revealed no sex differences, subject variable arguments argument sex was ignored in the reported analyses. High relevance Check on Experimental Conditions Opinion change 3.73 2.78 Use of liking/ Subjects informed that the university agreement rule 7.25 10.30 planned to adopt the trimester (if approved) Low relevance in 1981 (vs. 1985) judged the trimester issue Opinion change 2.18 4.68 to be significantly more personally relevant: Use of liking/ Ms = 5.58 versus 7.42, F(l, 76) = 5.62, agreement rule 8.75 8.95 p< .025). No other effects were significant on this measure. The only significant effect Note. Higher numbers indicate greater opinion on subjects' likableness ratings was due to change and greater use of the liking/agreement rule. Cell ns = 20. the source-argument pairing variable, F(l, 76) = 10.11, p < .005: The communicator who praised (vs. insulted) U of T students and friendlier (p < .001), but as less sincere and faculty and complimented (vs. derogated) (p < .05). No other effects were significant Toronto was regarded as more likable (Ms = on these ratings. 5.82 vs. 7.75). It had been expected that low relevance subjects would report greater use of the lik- ing/agreement rule. Although the means were Opinion Change in the expected direction, the relevance effect Opinion change scores (see Table 2) were proved nonsignificant (F < 1.0) on subjects' formed by subtracting the mean opinion of reports of the extent to which they typically the control group from each subject's opinion. agreed (disagreed) with people they liked As expected, the Relevance X Source-Argu- (disliked)." Analysis of this measure (see ment Pairing interaction proved significant Table 2 for means) did yield a source-argu- on these scores, F(l, 76) = 4.30, p < .OS. ment pairing effect (p<.025), and more Within low personal relevance conditions, sig- nificantly greater opinion change occurred 0 Because this item appears to ask for self-reported among subjects in the likable-communicator/ use of the liking/agreement heuristic over an ex- one-argument condition than in the unlikable- tended period of time, it is quite reasonable to argue communicator/five-arguments condition, F(l, that subjects' responses would not necessarily be 76) = 4.52, p < .05. Within high relevance affected by their present level of involvement (in- deed, the results on this item conformed only par- conditions, nonsignificantly greater opinion tially to predictions). The rationale for including change occurred among subjects in the unlik- this item and thinking that it might reflect high able-communicator/five-arguments (vs. lik- and low involvement subjects' differential use of the able/one-argument) condition, F < 1.0. No liking/agreement rule is similar to the logic under- other effects were significant on opinion lying Bern's (1972) self-perception hypothesis. Just as we might expect a person's presumably stable change. self-description of how honest he or she is typically Other measures. The likable communi- to be influenced by a recent and salient honest (or cator (who presented one argument), com- dishonest) behavior on his or her part, it was ex- pared to the unlikable communicator (who pected that subjects' self-reports of their typical use of the liking/agreement heuristic would be influenced presented five arguments), was viewed as by whether or not they had just employed this rule more likable (p < .005), warmer (p < .005), in making their opinion judgments.

762 SHELLY CHAIKEN interestingly, a Relevance X Source-Argu- communicator but were unaffected by the ment Pairing interaction (p < .05). The first amount of argumentation provided. In Experi- effect indicates greater reported use of the ment 2, subjects for whom the message topic liking/agreement rule among subjects in lik- was high in personal relevance showed slightly able-communicator/one-argument (vs. unlik- greater opinion change when receiving five able/five-arguments) conditions. The inter- arguments from an unlikable communicator action indicates that among subjects exposed than when receiving one argument from a lik- to five arguments from an unlikable com- able source. In contrast, subjects for whom municator, greater use of the liking/agreement the topic was low in personal relevance ex- rule was, as expected, reported by subjects hibited significantly greater opinion change within low relevance conditions. However, when they received one argument from a lik- among subjects receiving only one argument able (vs. five arguments from an unlikable) from a likable communicator, those within communicator. high personal relevance conditions reported Analyses on the supplementary measures greater use of this heuristic. included in Experiment 1 yielded additional No significant effects were obtained on sub- support for the assumptions underlying the jects' ratings of the amount of time they had major hypothesis. The fact that high conse- spent thinking about the communicator's quences subjects expressed a greater desire to arguments versus his personal characteristics. be well informed on the message topic cor- roborated the assumption that the conse- quences manipulation would engender differ- Discussion ing levels of motivation for in depth informa- The systematic versus heuristic analysis of tion processing. The data were also generally persuasion suggests that high levels of re- consistent with the assumption that these sponse or issue involvement lead message re- differing motivational sets would lead high cipients to employ a systematic information consequences subjects to employ a systematic processing strategy in forming their opinion processing strategy in which message-based judgments, whereas low levels of involvement cognitions would primarily mediate opinion lead recipients to employ a more economic change and would lead low consequences sub- heuristic strategy. Based on the assumption jects to employ a heuristic strategy in which that systematic processing maximizes the per- their perceptions of the communicator would suasive impact of message cues and mini- primarily mediate persuasion. High, compared mizes the impact of noncontent cues and that to low, consequences subjects spent more time heuristic processing minimizes the persuasive reading the persuasive message, reported impact of message cues and maximizes the spending more time thinking about the com- impact of noncontent cues, it was hypothe- municator's argumentation (vs. his personal sized that the initial opinion judgments of characteristics), recalled more arguments, and high involvement subjects would be more generated relatively more message-oriented strongly influenced by the amount of argu- (vs. communicator-oriented) thoughts. Fur- mentation provided in the message than by ther, correlational analyses revealed that ar- the communicator's likability, whereas the gument recall, positive message-oriented reverse would be true for low involvement thoughts, and negative message-oriented subjects. thoughts were significantly correlated with and The two experiments provided converging relatively good predictors of initial opinion evidence for this hypothesis. In the first change (ps < .11) for high consequences sub- study, high consequences subjects exhibited jects. In contrast, these variables were negli- significantly greater initial opinion change in gibly correlated with and poor predictors of response to messages containing six argu- initial opinion change (ps > .28) for low ments but were unaffected by the communi- consequences subjects. Finally, although per- cator's likability. Conversely, low conse- ceptions of communicator expertise were sig- quences subjects exhibited significantly greater nificantly correlated with opinion change opinion change in response to the likable within both consequences conditions, per-

SOURCE VERSUS MESSAGE CUES 763 ceived expertise proved to be a significant To more directly explore recipients' possible predictor of initial opinion change for low use of a liking/agreement rule, subjects in consequences (p < .05), but not high conse- Experiment 2 were asked to indicate the quences (p > .31), subjects. extent to which they typically agreed (dis- agreed) with people they liked (disliked). Communicator Likability and Opinion Change The findings obtained on this measure con- formed only partially to predictions. Among Although the opinion data of Experiment 1 subjects receiving five arguments from an were consistent with the suggestion that the unlikable communicator, low relevance sub- persuasive impact of communicator likability jects reported greater use of the liking/agree- might reflect recipients' use of a simple ment rule, as expected. However, among sub- schema such as "people generally agree with jects receiving one argument from a likable persons they like," the study provided no communicator, high relevance subjects re- direct support for this simple information ported greater use of this heuristic. It is pos- processing mechanism. Further, because the sible that although high relevance subjects in likable communicator was regarded not only this condition may have been primarily as more attractive but also as more expert, oriented toward assessing message content, sincere, trustworthy, and unbiased than his they may have considered a message contain- unlikable counterpart, it is probably unwise ing only one argument a meager basis for to interpret the impact of the likability ma- assessing message validity. Consequently, nipulation on opinion change and other mea- these subjects may have felt it necessary to sures as reflecting the unique effect of com- rely also on information regarding the com- municator likability, unconfounded by other municator's likability in forming their opin- source dimensions. The fact that subjects' per- ion judgments. This interpretation, although ceptions of communicator expertise related tentative, suggests that aside from low levels more strongly to opinion change than their of involvement, recipients may rely heavily on perceptions of communicator attractiveness source (or other noncontent) cues in judging underscores this point. Indeed, the finding message acceptability when the message's that expertise (and not attractiveness) pre- argumentation provides an insufficient basis dicted initial opinion change for low conse- on which to predicate an opinion judgment. quences subjects suggests that if, as pro- In support of this conjecture, McCroskey posed here, these subjects did employ a simple (1969) found that communicator credibility decision rule in forming their opinion judg- significantly affected opinion change only ments, it was most likely one based on their when the persuasive message contained mini- perceptions of the communicator's expertise. mal (vs. strong) evidence in support of its It is important to note that the likability overall conclusion (for an elaborated discus- manipulation of Experiment 1 had little im- sion of factors other than involvement that pact on measures presumed to reflect sub- may enhance the persuasive impact of source jects' processing of message content (e.g., cues, see Chaiken, 1978). argument recall, time spent reading the mes- sage, time spent thinking about the communi- Persistence oj Opinion Change cator's argumentation vs. time spent thinking about his personal characteristics). These As noted previously, Experiment 1 pro- findings are consistent with previous research vided adequate support for the assumption (e.g., Norman, 1976; Snyder & Rothbart, that message-based cognitions would pri- 1971) and compatible with a heuristic view marily mediate initial opinion change within of persuasion: Communicator characteristics high consequences conditions, whereas source- such as likability may often directly affect oriented cognitions would primarily mediate recipients' tendencies to accept or reject a opinion change within low consequences con- message's overall conclusion without neces- ditions. This assumption led to the hypothesis sarily influencing their processing of per- that greater opinion persistence would be suasive argumentation. manifested by high consequences subjects.

764 SHELLY CHAIKEN In accord with this hypothesis, opinion cessed message content, it is unlikely that change remained relatively stable over time Cook and Gruder's second criterion typically within high consequences conditions but dissi- would be met. Conversely, when involvement pated within low consequences conditions, is low, the present analysis suggests that although the decrease was significant only for message content has a minimal impact on low consequences subjects exposed to the opinions and that recipients generally predi- likable communicator. The failure to detect a cate their opinions on the basis of their reac- significant decrement within the low conse- tions to noncontent cues. Given low levels of quences/unlikable communicator condition is involvement, then, it is unlikely that Cook understandable, since initial change in this and Gruder's first criterion would often be cell was not reliably different from zero, pre- met. sumably because subjects used the communi- cator's unlikability as a discounting cue. Involvement and Persuasion The present persistence findings and analy- sis of persuasion are relevant to the sleeper Finally, the current research has implica- effect phenomenon. First, the data showed no tions for understanding the impact of in- hint of a sleeper effect: There was no trend, volvement on opinion change and opinion within or across consequences conditions, for persistence. The fact that involvement ex- agreement with an unlikable communicator to erted no main effect on initial opinion change increase with the passage of time. The tradi- in either experiment, as well as some recent tional "discounting-cue" explanation for the demonstrations that greater involvement sleeper effect (Hovland, Lumsdaine, & Shef- sometimes facilitates persuasion (e.g., Pallak, field, 1949) holds that over time, the dis- Mueller, Dollar, & Pallak, 1972; Petty & counting cue (e.g., communicator unlikabil- Cacioppo, 1979), contradicts earlier theoriz- ity) becomes dissociated from the message so ing (e.g., Sherif, Sherif, & Nebergall, 1965; that the persuasive impact of message content Triandis, 1971) and research (Miller, 1965; gradually becomes manifest (McGuire, 1969). Sherif & Hovland, 1961) suggesting that Cook and Cruder (Note 1) have suggested greater involvement typically lowers message that the sleeper effect is likely to be observed persuasiveness. The systematic versus heu- only if (among other criteria) (a) the mes- ristic analysis, which argues that greater in- sage is convincing and has a strong initial volvement heightens recipients' tendencies to impact on opinions and (b) the discounting scrutinize message content, suggests that high cue significantly inhibits the persuasive im- involvement can both facilitate and inhibit pact the message would typically have. An persuasion depending on the quality of per- implicit assumption of their analysis as well suasive argumentation. Indeed, Petty and as earlier analyses (Hovland et al., 1949; Cacioppo (1979) recently found that in- McGuire, 1968) is that recipients have ade- volvement heightened persuasion when a mes- quately processed message content-—other- sage contained strong arguments but inhib- wise it is unlikely that over time, the per- ited persuasion when the message presented suasive impact of message content could weak arguments. On the other hand, the find- possibly manifest itself. ing in Experiment 1 that high consequences The systematic versus heuristic analysis of subjects showed relatively greater opinion persuasion suggests that Cook and Gruder's stability suggests, in accord with previous (Note 1) two criteria may be met and, con- correlational evidence (Watts, 1967), that sequently, that the sleeper effect may be opinion change induced under high involve- observed only when involvement is at some ment conditions results in greater persistence. moderate level. When involvement is high, the This greater persistence presumably occurs present analysis suggests that the persuasive impact of potential discounting cues (e.g., because high involvement fosters in depth low levels of credibility, likability) will be processing of message content, which leads minimal. Thus, unless perhaps a discounting recipients to possess more topic-relevant cog- cue is made salient after recipients have pro- nitive supports for their adopted opinions.

SOURCE VERSUS MESSAGE CUES 765 Summary and Conclusions Payne, Cognition and social behavior. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1976. The present research generally supports the Bern, D. J. Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz distinction made between a systematic view of (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology persuasion, with its emphasis on detailed (Vol. 6). New York: Academic Press, 1972. Chaiken, S. The use of source versus message cues in information processing and the mediational persuasion: An information processing analysis. role of content-based cognitions, and a heu- Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of ristic view of persuasion, with its focus on the Massachusetts—Amherst, 1978. role of simple rules or cognitive heuristics in Chaiken, S., & Eagly, A. H. Communication modal- ity as a determinant of message persuasiveness mediating opinion change. Admittedly, the and message comprehension. Journal of Person- research was more successful in documenting ality and Social Psychology, 1976, 34, 605-614. the cognitive mediation of opinion change Cialdini, R. B., Levy, A., Herman, P., Kozlowski, L. specified by a systematic view of persuasion T., & Petty, R. E. Elastic shifts of opinion: De- terminants of direction and durability. Journal of than it was in documenting the cognitive Personality and Social Psychology, 1976, 34, 663- mediation specified by a heuristic conceptual- 672. ization. Yet the overall pattern of findings Eagly, A. H. Comprehensibility of persuasive argu- supports the utility of the latter conceptuali- ments as a determinant of opinion change. Journal zation and suggests that it may be worth- of Personality and Social Psychology, 1974, 29, 758-773. while for persuasion researchers to further Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. An attribution analysis explore the conditions under which recipients of the effects of communicator characteristics on may engage in heuristic information process- opinion change: The case of communicator attrac- ing and to explore more systematically the tiveness. Journal of Personality and Social Psy- chology, 1975, 32, 136-144. kinds of simple information processing mech- Eagly, A. H., & Warren, R. Intelligence, comprehen- anisms that may often underlie persuasion sion, and opinion change. Journal of Personality, effects. 1976, 44, 226-242. The research also provides some support for Gicsen, M., & Hendrick, C. Effects of false positive the hypothesis that content-mediated opinion and negative arousal feedback on persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1974, change should persist longer than source- 30, 449-457. mediated persuasion. Finally, the relevance Hendrick, C., & Giesen, M. Self-attribution of atti- of the systematic versus heuristic analysis of tude as a function of belief feedback. Memory and persuasion to the sleeper effect phenomenon Cognition, 1976, 4, 150-155. and the role of involvement in persuasion are Hovland, C. I., Janis, I. L., & Kelley, H. H. Com- munication and persuasion. New Haven, Conn.: discussed. With regard to the former, it is Yale University Press, 1953. suggested that the preconditions thought nec- Hovland, C. I., Lumsdaine, A. A., & Sheffield, F. D. essary for obtaining the sleeper effect (Cook Experiments on mass communication. Princeton, & Cruder, Note 1) may not often occur when N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1949. involvement levels are set very high or low. Johnson, H. H., & Scileppi, J. A. Effects of ego- With respect to involvement itself, it is ar- involvement conditions on attitude change to high and low credibility communicators. Journal of gued that although heightened involvement Personality and Social Psychology, 1969, 13, 31-36. can both facilitate and inhibit the immediate Jones, R. A., & Brehm, J. W. Attitudinal effects of impact of a persuasive message, change in- communicator attractiveness when one chooses to duced under conditions of high (vs. low) in- listen. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- ogy, 1967, 6, 64-70. volvement should show greater persistence. Kiesler, C., Collins, B., & Miller, N. Attitude change. New York: Wiley, 1969. Reference Note Landy, D. The effects of an overheard audience's 1. Cook, T. D., & Cruder, C. L. The sleeper effect reaction and attractiveness on opinion change. predicted from the discounting cue hypothesis: A Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1972, 8, 276-288. living phenomenon. Unpublished manuscript, Northwestern University, 1979. McCroskey, J. C. A summary of experimental re- search on the effects of evidence in persuasive communication. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 1969, References 55, 169-176. Abelson, R. P. Script processing in attitude forma- McGuire, W. J. Personality and susceptibility to tion and decision making. In J. S. Carroll & J. W. social influence. In E. F. Borgatta & W. W. Lam-

766 SHELLY CHAIKEN bert (Eds.), Handbook of personality theory and Petty, R. E., Wells, G. L., & Brock, T. C. Distraction research. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1968. can enhance or reduce yielding to propaganda: McGuire, W. J. The nature of attitudes and atti- Thought disruption versus justification. Journal of tude change. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), Personality and Social Psychology, 1976, 34, 874- The handbook of social psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 884. 3). Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1969. Rhine, R. J., & Severence, L. J. Ego-involvement, Miller, N. Involvement and dogmatism as inhibitors discrepancy, source credibility, and attitude of attitude change. Journal of Experimental Social change. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- Psychology, 1965,1, 121-132. ogy, 1970, 16, 175-190. Miller, N., Maruyama, G., Beaber, R. J., & Valone, Sherif, M., & Hovland, C. I. Social judgment. New K. Speed of speech and persuasion. Journal of Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1961. Personality and Social Psychology, 1976, 34, 615- Sherif, C. W., Sherif, M., & Nebergall, R. E. Atti- 624. tude and attitude change. Philadelphia, Pa.: Minium, E. W. Statistical reasoning in psychology Saunders, 1965. and education.. New York: Wiley, 1970. Silverthorne, C. P., & Mazmanian, L. The effects of Mintz, P. M., & Mills, J. Effects of arousal and in- heckling and media of presentation on the impact formation about its source upon attitude change. of a persuasive communication. Journal of Social Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1971, Psychology, 1975, 96, 229-236. 7, 561-570. Snyder, M., & Rothbart, M. Communicator attrac- Norman, R. When what is said is important: A tiveness and opinion change. Canadian Journal of comparison of expert and attractive sources. Behavioral Science, 1971, 3, 377-387. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1976, Stotland, E., & Canon, L. K. Social psychology: A 12, 294-300. cognitive approach. Philadelphia, Pa.: Saunders, Osterhouse, R. A., & Brock, T. C. Distraction in- 1972. creases yielding to propaganda by inhibiting Triandis, H. Attitude and attitude change. New counterarguing. Journal of Personality and Social York: Wiley, 1971. Psychology, 1970,15, 344-358. Watts, W. A. Relative persistence of opinion change Pallak, M. S., Mueller, M., Dollar, K., & Pallak, J. induced by active compared to passive participa- Effect of commitment on responsiveness to an tion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, extreme consonant communication. Journal of 1967, 5, 4-15. Personality and Social Psychology, 1972, 23, 429- Zimbardo, P. G. Involvement and communication 436. discrepancy as determinants of opinion conformity. Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. Issue involvement Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1960, can increase or decrease persuasion by enhancing 60, 86-94. message-relevant cognitive responses. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1979, 37, 1915- 1926. Received June 18, 1979 •